In HTML and CSS, elements are classified as either inline elements or block-level elements, and this classification dictates how they behave in the document layout.

Understanding this difference is crucial for controlling how your content is displayed on a webpage.

Block-level elements are elements that take up the full width available to them by default, stretching across the width of their container.

These elements always start on a new line and push other content to the next line, creating a "block" of content.

Block-level elements have the CSS property display: block; applied by default. This property ensures that the element stretches to fill the container's width and appears on a new line.

Some common block-level elements are div elements, paragraphs, headings, ordered lists, unordered lists, and section elements.

Here is a code example of a block-level element:

<p style="border: 2px solid red;">
  First paragraph
</p>
<p>Second paragraph</p>
In this example, we have two paragraph elements where the first one has a red border around it.

The two paragraph elements do not share the same line because they are block level elements by default.

So, both paragraph elements will take up the full width of its container, which in this case is the body element.

Block-level elements are ideal when you want content to stack vertically, such as paragraphs, sections, or larger blocks of content. They're commonly used to define the layout and structure of a webpage.

Inline elements, unlike block-level elements, only take up as much width as they need and do not start on a new line. These elements flow within the content, allowing text and other inline elements to appear alongside them.

Inline elements have the CSS property display: inline; applied by default. This property ensures that the element remains within the flow of the content and does not break onto a new line.

Common inline elements are span, anchor, and img elements.

Here's an example to better understand inline elements:

<p>This is a
  <span style="color: red; border: 2px solid green;">red</span>
  word inside a paragraph.
</p>
In this example, we have a span element nested inside of a paragraph element. The span element has a red text color with a green border around it so you can see the highlighted word better.

As you can see, the span element only takes up as much space as the word "red" and does not push the following content to a new line.

Inline elements are best used for styling smaller portions of text or content within a line, such as emphasizing a word, creating hyperlinks, or applying specific styles to parts of a paragraph.

